Memo #1: The Downside of Data Collection
When I set out to do an independent data project, I had a vision of taking on an ambitious project from soup to nuts, from data acquisition to highly engaging and unexpected storytelling (mainly, through visualization). To me, an element of this would be my own data request via a FOIA. At POLITICO, I work everyday with publically available datasets, so a FOIA seemed like it would be a key element of the challenge.
Since I’m reporting in Washington, I decided to gather data from a federal agency. I began the process with this research question: using a combination of Veterans Affairs and Department of Education data, could I figure out where student-veterans are enrolling, and in which schools and types of programs they are succeeding? I asked a military beat journalist if there was available data I should grab, and he mentioned I should look into JAMRS data, survey information the Department of Defense collects for recruiting and retention purposes. And so, I did what I’d been trained to do in the Medill FOIA workshops: Request data from the Department of Defense.
So, I go ahead and file it. Weeks go by—nothing. Finally, I receive a response that the scope of my request could not be fulfilled because it wasn’t specific enough, and that some of what I was requesting wasn’t available to the public. Immediately seeing the error of my ways, I knew what I would have to do to get a more precise request.  But, given that this class wraps in August, there was likely no way I could receive it and make use of it in time for our project’s due date.
So, what are the big takeaways from this major flop? First, a lesson in precisions. FOIAs require precision, and even if I have a fishing expedition going on with a data project, it is very important not to let that state of research show on a FOIA request.
Second, a lesson in timing. Two months isn’t much time to pull off a big data project, especially when FOIAs are involved. This project even has a longer timeframe than what’s allowed for most stories, so keeping in mind how long it will take to collect data will be very important going forward. This lesson also offered some perspective on what it would take to plan stories based on acquiring data. Even if I think there’s a good data story to be told on a subject, there may not be enough time to collect and sift through the data before it’s yesterday’s news. In some ways, a data journalist thinks more like a features writer than a breaking news or beat reporter. They have to pay attention to the news cycle, but plan far enough ahead so they can acquire and makes sense of data in a way that’s still interesting to an audience.
Third, know how to use your sources. A few weeks after I gave up on trying to acquire the data, I spoke with an expert at a military-affiliated think tank who mentioned that he could access much of the data I’d been seeking, and with permission, he likely could pass it along. I had never thought to use a third party to access the data and just took “no” for an answer from the agency. Going forward, I plan to make sure I do a little more research before I go straight to the data. That exercise might also help me better learn whether data is even worth looking into, or guide the types of questions I ask of it. 
And lastly, get creative. It also turns out that a nonprofit, Student Veterans of America, keeps track of much of this data via a comprehensive self-reported survey. It’s not quite as precise as a government data set, but it would sufficiently illustrate the trends I’d been looking into (in fact, they do some of the same splicing and dicing I anticipated doing!). Leaning on sources to help track down something “good enough” might be a good way to approach these bigger, unwieldy projects, too—or, at the very least, would be a good way to start them.  
