Memo #2: Scope Matters
After it became clear that I would fail to address my initial research question in mid-July, I decided to turn my attention to a new timely subject that could possibly turn into a story for POLITICO: How successful has this Congress—perfectly aligned in party across not only both houses, but also the executive branch—been in passing legislation prior to the first August recess? And how does that productivity measure up to other times in history when this has been the case? I knew it was a question a lot of other news organization would probably try to address—especially given the current political climate, and sharp criticisms of the administration’s ability to make progress on its agenda—but I wanted to tackle it with raw data myself.
Luckily, there are a lot of sources for this information. ProPublica has a Congress API that shares bill passage going back to last least the last 10 Congresses, and POLITICO Pro (to which I have access) recently introduced a new tool called Legislative Compass, which offers much of the same. The path forward on this subject seemed pretty straight: Figure out which times in American history in which the houses of Congress have been aligned with the presidency, and see how many bills and resolutions they passed leading up to the August recess. 
Straightforward indeed, but not without challenge. First, it’s actually really hard to compare a Congress in session to those that have closed. The bill statuses of an open session of Congress don’t map neatly onto the “passed or not” designations afford Congresses that have completed; we don’t yet know, for example, which of the 115th Congresses bills will actually turn into law, and which will fall by the wayside. This prevented an apples-to-apples comparison between the current Congress and past ones, but it didn’t completely thwart my efforts. Instead, it presented an opportunity to explain something within my story. I couldn’t come to any conclusions as to exactly how this Congress will succeed in comparison to others, but I could make some observations about how much legislation is typically introduced in the time leading up to the first August recess, and how much of it is passed. While that wouldn’t make the comparison precise, it would give readers a way to contextualize the information they were presented with. Recognizing this mild speed bump reminded me that data doesn’t have to be perfect to be presentable; it just needs to be explainable.
I also had a fairly ambitious vision in going pretty far back in time—what about how well Congresses performed over the course of the 20th and 21st century? I quickly learned a lesson in scope that kept my timeframe within the last 20 years. It turns out that the availability of sophisticated congressional datasets maintains some correlation with the age of the tools that maintain it: None of the sources I was exploring offered data going back as far as I would like. This just meant I needed to dial back the timeframe with which I was working. For a project like this one that’s really of my own choosing, that’s no big deal. But not every assignment will be as forgiving, and as a result, I learned a little something about planning ahead. I went into this assuming that all the data I needed would be at my fingertips, and when it wasn’t, it changed my direction. While it’s always good to “look before you leap,” this small project offered a sound reminder. I imagine this is something I should always look into before I pitch a data story, to make sure I can pull it off in the amount of time I propose. Should additional data-gathering efforts be necessary, I should be aware of them ahead of time (especially because I’m a pretty slow coder, and parsing anything old and static could take me awhile!)
